blog: Add parsing .DS_Store files post (#2022)
zaproxy/zaproxy-website: site/content/blog/2023-09-04-ds-store-parsing/index.md

---
title: "Parsing .DS_Store files with ZAP"
summary: "ZAP Spider can now probe and parse macOS' .DS_Store files."
images:
type: post
tags:
- blog
- recon
- spider
date: "2023-09-04"
authors:
    - skyper

> ---
> macOS has been using [`.DS_Store`][wikipedia-ds-store] hidden files for many

Reviewer: ```suggestion
---

macOS has been using [`.DS_Store`][wikipedia-ds-store] hidden files for many
```

years to store metadata about files and folders on a file system. These metadata
are mainly created and used by the [Finder][wikipedia-finder] to store
attributes like your preferred view option for a particular folder, or the icon
positions of the files it contains.

`.DS_Store` files, when accidentally published and accessible on the Internet,
can leak information about the structure of a file hierarchy, leading to
potential information disclosure vulnerabilities. It is often the case when
stored in the Git repository of a website.

Discovering and reading the contents of `.DS_Store` files present on a website
can prove to be a valuable asset when conducting web security audits and
penetration tests. This has led me to the idea of integrating this
reconnaissance task as part of the ZAP Spider tool, enabling the process to be
fully automated and saving time during security engagements. But first things
first, one needs to parse the internal structure of such files.

> ## Parsing .DS_Store files

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Parsing .DS_Store Files
```

The specifications detailing the internal structure of `.DS_Store` files have
never been made public, but [thanks to community-driven
efforts][0day-parsing-ds-store], most parts have been reverse engineered,
enabling people to create custom parsers. Nevertheless, writing a parser for
`.DS_Store` files is not a trivial task given the complexity of the format. This

> is why not much implementations can be found online, and most of them are in
> Python, Go and Perl only.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is why few implementations can be found online, and most of them are in
Python, Go, or Perl only.
```

Author: Agreed. It reads better this way. Thanks.

    class Header(KaitaiStruct):
        def __init__(self, _io, _parent=None, _root=None):
            self._io = _io
            self._parent = _parent
            self._root = _root if _root else self
            self._read()

        def _read(self):
            self.magic = self._io.read_bytes(3)
            if not self.magic == b"\x47\x49\x46":
                raise kaitaistruct.ValidationNotEqualError(b"\x47\x49\x46", self.magic, self._io, u"/types/header/seq/0")
            self.version = self._io.read_bytes(3)

    class LogicalScreen(KaitaiStruct):
        def __init__(self, _io, _parent=None, _root=None):
            self._io = _io
            self._parent = _parent
            self._root = _root if _root else self
            self._read()

        def _read(self):
            self.image_width = self._io.read_u2le()
            self.image_height = self._io.read_u2le()
            self.flags = self._io.read_u1()
            self.bg_color_index = self._io.read_u1()
            self.pixel_aspect_ratio = self._io.read_u1()
```

Note that the code produced relies on an external dependency from the Kaitai
Struct project, so the result is not standalone.

> In comparison, the internal structure of a `.DS_Store` file is immensity more

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In comparison, the internal structure of a `.DS_Store` file is immensely more
```

Author: Good catch! Thanks.

complex as the following diagram can attest (also programmatically generated
thanks to the Kaitai Struct project):

![Diagram of the internal structure of a .DS_Store file](./images/ds_store.png)

Basically, a `.DS_Store` file structures its data as
[B-trees][wikipedia-b-tree], with each B-tree referred to as a "directory" in
this file format's terminology. Each directory consists of blocks (where a block
represents a node in a B-tree), and each block consists of records. Each record
contains a filename and a type that defines the purpose of its value.

It took me some time to write a functional Kaitai Struct format specification
for the `.DS_Store` files, but the result is now publicly accessible in the
[Kaitai Struct's Format Gallery][kaitai-struct-format-gallery].

> ## Probing .DS_Store files with ZAP

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Probing .DS_Store Files with ZAP
```

            self.flags = self._io.read_u1()
            self.bg_color_index = self._io.read_u1()
            self.pixel_aspect_ratio = self._io.read_u1()
```

Note that the code produced relies on an external dependency from the Kaitai
Struct project, so the result is not standalone.

In comparison, the internal structure of a `.DS_Store` file is immensely more
complex as the following diagram can attest (also programmatically generated
thanks to the Kaitai Struct project):

![Diagram of the internal structure of a .DS_Store file](./images/ds_store.png)

Basically, a `.DS_Store` file structures its data as
[B-trees][wikipedia-b-tree], with each B-tree referred to as a "directory" in
this file format's terminology. Each directory consists of blocks (where a block
represents a node in a B-tree), and each block consists of records. Each record
contains a filename and a type that defines the purpose of its value.

It took me some time to write a functional Kaitai Struct format specification
for the `.DS_Store` files, but the result is now publicly accessible in the
[Kaitai Struct's Format Gallery][kaitai-struct-format-gallery].

## Probing .DS_Store Files with ZAP

> ZAP has a tool called the Spider which enables to discover new resources on a

Author: Both are synonyms here but I don't mind changing it.

> website. Basically, it works by scanning a first web page for references to

Author: I don't mind changing it.

@kingthorin What do you think?

> website. Basically, it works by scanning a first web page for references to

Author: Done in d5d3c96.

A new instance of the `DsStore` class generated by the Kaitai Struct compiler is
then created, allowing to easily navigate the inner workings of the `.DS_Store`
file ([see on
GitHub](https://github.com/zaproxy/zap-extensions/blob/5e078b1770c888a1bd6071e2a314d86c3128ddb0/addOns/spider/src/main/java/org/zaproxy/addon/spider/parser/DsStoreParser.java#L56-L63)):

```java
DsStore dsStore = null;
try {
    dsStore =
            new DsStore((new ByteBufferKaitaiStream(message.getResponseBody().getBytes())));
} catch (Exception ex) {
    getLogger().debug(ex.getMessage());
    return false;
}
```

For each directory (B-tree) in the `.DS_Store` file, the master block is read to
obtain the location of the root block. The B-tree is then traversed recursively
from its root block ([see on
GitHub](https://github.com/zaproxy/zap-extensions/blob/5e078b1770c888a1bd6071e2a314d86c3128ddb0/addOns/spider/src/main/java/org/zaproxy/addon/spider/parser/DsStoreParser.java#L64-L78)):

```java
for (MasterBlockRef masterBlockRef : dsStore.buddyAllocatorBody().directories()) {
    // Each B-tree directory has one master block comprising metadata.
    MasterBlock masterBlock = masterBlockRef.masterBlock();

>     getLogger().debug("Rcords: {}", masterBlock.numRecords());

Author: The typo is present in the original source code, so I didn't fix it in my code snippet to keep it accurate.

>     getLogger().debug("Rcords: {}", masterBlock.numRecords());

Reviewer 2: Typo is being fixed.

>     getLogger().debug("Rcords: {}", masterBlock.numRecords());

Author: OK thanks. I will wait until https://github.com/zaproxy/zap-extensions/pull/4874 gets merged to update the permalink to the source code accordingly.

>     getLogger().debug("Rcords: {}", masterBlock.numRecords());

Author: https://github.com/zaproxy/zap-extensions/pull/4874 got merged so I fixed the typo in the code and updated the related permalink in 5d37cbb.
